Routes entity page, router expressions, proxying (#168)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_gateway_entities/route.md

Routes can also define rules that match requests to associated Services. Because of this, one Route can reference multiple endpoints. Once a Route is matched, {{site.base_gateway}} proxies the request to its associated Service. A basic Route should have a name, path or paths, and reference an existing Service.

When you configure Routes, you can also specify the following:

* **Protocols:** The protocol used to communicate with the [upstream application](/gateway/entities/upstream/).
* **Hosts:** Lists of domains that match a Route
* **Methods:** HTTP methods that match a Route
* **Headers:** Lists of values that are expected in the header of a request
* **Redirect status codes:** HTTPS status codes
* **Tags:** Optional set of strings to group Routes with

## Route and Service interaction

> Routes, in conjunction with [Services](/gateway/entities/service/), let you expose your Services to applications with {{site.base_gateway}}. {{site.base_gateway}} abstracts the Service from the applications by using Routes. Since the application always uses the Route to make a request, changes to the Services, like versioning, don’t impact how applications make the request. Routes also allow the same Service to be used by multiple applications and apply different policies based on the Route used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Routes, in conjunction with [Services](/gateway/entities/service/), let you expose your Services to applications with {{site.base_gateway}}. {{site.base_gateway}} abstracts the Service from the applications by using Routes. Since the application always uses the Route to make a request, changes to the Services, like versioning, don’t impact how applications make the request.
```
Moving this sentence to intro the example instead, since the example is about that.

The following diagram shows how Routes interact with other {{site.base_gateway}} entities:

{% mermaid %}
flowchart LR
  A(API client)
  B("`Route 
  (/mock)`")
  C("`Service
  (example-service)`")
  D(Upstream 
  application)
  
  A <--requests
  responses--> B
  subgraph id1 ["`
  **KONG GATEWAY**`"]
    B <--requests
    responses--> C
  end
  C <--requests
  responses--> D

  style id1 rx:10,ry:10
  
{% endmermaid %}

> For example, if you have an external application and an internal application that need to access the `example_service` Service, but the external application should be limited in how often it can query the Service to assure no denial of service. If a rate limit policy is configured for the Service when the internal application calls it, the internal application is limited as well. Routes can solve this problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Routes also allow the same Service to be used by multiple applications and apply different policies based on the Route used.

For example, say you have an external application and an internal application that need to access the `example_service` Service, but the *external* application should be limited in how often it can query the Service to avoid a denial of service. If you apply a rate limit policy to the Service and the *internal* application calls it, the internal application is also limited. Routes can solve this problem.
```

> In the example above, two Routes can be created, say `/external` and `/internal`, and both of them can point to `example_service`. You can configure a policy to limit how often the `/external` Route is used and it can be communicated to the external client for use. When the external client tries to access the Service via {{site.base_gateway}} using `/external`, they're rate limited. But when the internal client accesses the Service using {{site.base_gateway}} using `/internal`, the internal client isn't limited.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this example, you can create two Routes to handle the two applications, say `/external` and `/internal`, and point both of them to `example_service`. 
You can configure a policy to limit how often the `/external` Route is used. 
When the external application tries to access the Service via {{site.base_gateway}} using `/external`, they're rate limited. 
But when the internal application accesses the Service using {{site.base_gateway}} using `/internal`, the internal application isn't limited.
```
I removed "and it can be communicated to the external client for use", that seems unnecessary/implied here.

related_resources:
  - text: Gateway Services
    url: /gateway/entities/service/
  - text: Expressions router
    url: /gateway/routing/expressions/
  - text: Upstream entity
    url: /gateway/entities/upstream/

tools:
  - admin-api
  - konnect-api
  - kic
  - deck
  - terraform

schema:
  api: gateway/admin-ee
  path: /schemas/Route

---

## What is a Route? 

{{page.description}} [Gateway Services](/gateway/entities/service/) can store collections of objects like plugin configurations and policies, and they can be associated with Routes. In {{site.base_gateway}}, Routes typically map to endpoints that are exposed through the {{site.base_gateway}} application. Routes determine how (and if) requests are sent to their Services after they reach {{site.base_gateway}}. Where a Service represents the backend API, a Route defines what is exposed to clients. 

Routes can also define rules that match requests to associated Services. Because of this, one Route can reference multiple endpoints. Once a Route is matched, {{site.base_gateway}} proxies the request to its associated Service. A basic Route should have a name, path or paths, and reference an existing Service.

> {% mermaid %}

Author: @lena-larionova I think I switched to the diagram you're referecing before break but then the Friday before break, got feedback from others that the diagram that's currently here was more helpful? Maybe I should include both with a description about the differences?

> {% mermaid %}

Reviewer: Let's leave this one in for now. It does the job well enough now that there's a second diagram as well.

2. **Wildcard hosts:** Among Routes with the same "priority point" value, those that have any wildcard host specification will be considered after those that don't have any wildcard host (or no host) specified.
3. **Header count:** The resulting groups are sorted so the Routes with a higher number of specified headers have higher priority than those with a lower number of headers.
4. **Regular expressions and prefix paths:** Routes that have a regular expression path are considered first and are ordered by their `regex_priority` value. Routes that have no regular expression path are ordered by the length of their paths. 

When two Routes have the same path, {{site.base_gateway}} uses a tiebreaker. For example, if the rule count for the given request is the same in two Routes `A` and `B`, then the following tiebreaker rules will be applied in the order they are listed. Route `A` will be selected over `B` if:
  * `A` has only "plain" Host headers and `B` has one or more "wildcard"
  host headers
  * `A` has more non-Host headers than `B`.
  * `A` has at least one "regex" paths and `B` has only "plain" paths.
  * `A`'s longest path is longer than `B`'s longest path.

>   * `A.created_at < B.created_at`

Reviewer: The `created_at` rule is missing from the list before this. Looks like that's the final priority rule, aka rule number 5? If all of the above are  equal, the router chooses the route that was created first.

#### Expressions router mode

> In [`expressions` mode](/gateway/routing/expressions/) when a request comes in, {{site.base_gateway}} evaluates Routes with a higher `priority` number first. The priority is a positive integer that defines the order of evaluation of the router. The larger the priority integer, the sooner a Route will be evaluated. In the case of duplicate priority values between two Routes in the same router, their order of evaluation is undefined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [`expressions` mode](/gateway/routing/expressions/), when a request comes in, {{site.base_gateway}} evaluates Routes with a higher `priority` number first. The priority is a positive integer that defines the order of evaluation of the router. The larger the priority integer, the sooner a Route will be evaluated. In the case of duplicate priority values between two Routes in the same router, their order of evaluation is undefined.
```

### Routing performance recommendations

You can use the following recommendations to increase routing performance:

* In `expressions` mode, we recommend putting more likely matched Routes before (as in, higher priority) those that are less frequently matched.

> * Regular expressions in Routes use more resources to evaluate than simple prefixes. In installations with thousands of Routes, replacing regular expression with simple prefix can improve throughput and latency of {{site.base_gateway}}. If regex must be used because an exact path match must be performed, using the [expressions router](/gateway/routing/expressions/) will significantly improve {{site.base_gateway}}’s performance in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Regular expressions in Routes use more resources to evaluate than simple prefixes. In installations with thousands of Routes, replacing a regular expression with simple prefix can improve throughput and latency of {{site.base_gateway}}. If a regex must be used because an exact path match must be performed, using the [expressions router](/gateway/routing/expressions/) will significantly improve {{site.base_gateway}}’s performance in this case.
```

entities:
  - route

description: |
  A Route is a path which defines how (and if) requests are passed to Gateway Services and their respective upstream applications based on a set of configured rules.

related_resources:
  - text: Gateway Service entity
    url: /gateway/entities/service/
  - text: Expressions router
    url: /gateway/routing/expressions/
  - text: Upstream entity
    url: /gateway/entities/upstream/

tools:
  - admin-api
  - konnect-api
  - kic
  - deck
  - terraform

schema:
  api: gateway/admin-ee
  path: /schemas/Route

> faq:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
faqs:
```

In this example, you can create two Routes to handle the two applications, say `/external` and `/internal`, and point both of them to `example_service`. 
You can configure a policy to limit how often the `/external` Route is used. 
When the external application tries to access the Service via {{site.base_gateway}} using `/external`, it's rate limited. 
But when the internal application accesses the Service using {{site.base_gateway}} using `/internal`, the internal application isn't limited.

The following diagram illustrates this example:

{% mermaid %}
flowchart LR
  A(External application)
  B("`Route (/external)`")
  B2(Rate Limiting 
  plugin)
  C("`Service (example-service)`")
  D(Upstream application)
  E(Internal application)
  F("`Route (/internal)`")

  A --request--> B
  E --request--> F

  subgraph id1 ["`
  **KONG GATEWAY**`"]
    B --> B2 --"10 requests 
    per minute"--> C
    F ---> C
  end

  C --transformed 
  and routed 
  requests--> D

  style id1 rx:10,ry:10

{% endmermaid %}

## Route use cases

Common use cases for Routes:

> | You want to... | Then use... |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Use Case | Description |
```
This is a more dry title, but the old one doesn't fit when you're shortening the use case.

When you configure Routes, you can also specify the following:

* **Protocols:** The protocol used to communicate with the [Upstream](/gateway/entities/upstream/) application.
* **Hosts:** Lists of domains that match a Route
* **Methods:** HTTP methods that match a Route
* **Headers:** Lists of values that are expected in the header of a request
* **Redirect status codes:** HTTPS status codes
* **Tags:** Optional set of strings to group Routes with

Use Routes if you don't need to load balance traffic to hosts. If you need to do load balancing between hostnames, configure your hosts in an [Upstream](/gateway/entities/upstream/) instead.

## Route and Service interaction

Routes, in conjunction with [Services](/gateway/entities/service/), let you expose your Services to applications with {{site.base_gateway}}. {{site.base_gateway}} abstracts the Service from the applications by using Routes. Since the application always uses the Route to make a request, changes to the Services, like versioning, don’t impact how applications make the request.

The following diagram shows how Routes interact with other {{site.base_gateway}} entities:

> {% mermaid %}

Author: I'll remake the diagram with the example content below!

flowchart LR
  A(API client)
  B("`Route 
  (/mock)`")
  C("`Service
  (example-service)`")
  D(Upstream 
  application)
  
  A <--requests
  responses--> B
  subgraph id1 ["`
  **KONG GATEWAY**`"]
    B <--requests
    responses--> C
  end
  C <--requests
  responses--> D

  style id1 rx:10,ry:10
  
{% endmermaid %}

> Routes also allow the same Service to be used by multiple applications and apply different policies based on the Route used.

Author: Will do!

For example, say you have an external application and an internal application that need to access the `example_service` Service, but the *external* application should be limited in how often it can query the Service to avoid a denial of service. If you apply a rate limit policy to the Service and the *internal* application calls it, the internal application is also limited. Routes can solve this problem.

In this example, you can create two Routes to handle the two applications, say `/external` and `/internal`, and point both of them to `example_service`. 
You can configure a policy to limit how often the `/external` Route is used. 
When the external application tries to access the Service via {{site.base_gateway}} using `/external`, they're rate limited. 
But when the internal application accesses the Service using {{site.base_gateway}} using `/internal`, the internal application isn't limited.

> ## How routing works

Author: For reviewers: I added routing here and removed the existing routing standalone page. My thinking, routing made the most sense in context with routes. I think it would be difficult to create something more than a very basic route without understanding routing, so in the spirit of every page is page one, I added it here. 

But I did wonder if it should be a standalone page still and this section could be an include.

When proxying, Kong Gateway’s default behavior is to set the Upstream request’s Host header to the hostname specified in the Service’s `host`. The `preserve_host` field accepts a boolean flag instructing Kong Gateway not to do so.

| Example config | Example routing request matches |
|---------------|--------------------------------|
| `{"hosts":["example.com", "foo-service.com"]}` | `Host: example.com` and `Host: foo-service.com` | 
| `headers.region=north` | `Region: North` |
| `"hosts": ["*.example.com", "example.*"]` | `Host: an.example.com` and `Host: example.org` |
| `"hosts": ["service.com"], "preserve_host": true,` | `Host: service.com` |
| `"headers": { "version": ["v1", "v2"] }` | `version: v1` |

#### Request path

**Supported protocols:** `http` and `grpc`

Another way for a Route to be matched is via request paths. To satisfy this routing condition, a client request’s normalized path must be prefixed with one of the values of the `paths` attribute.

Kong Gateway detects that the request's normalized URL path is prefixed with one of the Routes’ `paths` values. By default, Kong Gateway would then proxy the request Upstream without changing the URL path.

> When proxying with path prefixes, the longest paths get evaluated first. This allow you to define two Routes with two paths: `/service` and `/service/resource`, and ensure that the former does not “shadow” the latter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When proxying with path prefixes, the longest paths get evaluated first. This allows you to define two Routes with two paths: `/service` and `/service/resource`, and ensure that the former doesn't “shadow” the latter.
```

As soon as a Route yields a match, the router stops matching and {{site.base_gateway}} uses the matched Route to [proxy the current request](/gateway/traffic-control/proxy/).

### Routing performance recommendations

You can use the following recommendations to increase routing performance:

* In `expressions` mode, we recommend putting more likely matched Routes before (as in, higher priority) those that are less frequently matched.
* Regular expressions in Routes use more resources to evaluate than simple prefixes. In installations with thousands of Routes, replacing regular expression with simple prefix can improve throughput and latency of {{site.base_gateway}}. If regex must be used because an exact path match must be performed, using the [expressions router](/gateway/routing/expressions/) will significantly improve {{site.base_gateway}}’s performance in this case.

> ## Route use cases

Author: For reviewers: should this be bumped up the page?
